.\" helmlog.1 — man page for the HelmLog CLI
.TH HELMLOG 1 "2026-03-08" "HelmLog" "HelmLog Manual"
.SH NAME
helmlog \- open-source sailing data platform
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B helmlog
.RI [ command ]
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
HelmLog is a Raspberry Pi-based sailing data logger that reads from a B&G
instrument system via Signal K Server, stores time-series sailing data in
SQLite, and provides a web interface for race marking, history, debrief
audio, and performance exports.
.PP
Data can be exported as CSV, GPX, or JSON for use in Sailmon and other
regatta analysis tools.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Core
.TP
.B run
Start the data logging loop. Connects to Signal K (or CAN bus if
\fBDATA_SOURCE=can\fR), records instrument data, and serves the web interface.
.TP
.B status
Show database row counts and last-seen timestamps for each data table.
.TP
.B export
Export a time range to CSV.
.SS Video & Media
.TP
.B list\-cameras
Show configured cameras and their ping status.
.TP
.B link\-video
Link a YouTube video to logged data via a time sync point.
.TP
.B list\-videos
List linked YouTube videos.
.TP
.B link\-channel\-videos
Match YouTube channel videos to Gaia GPS-imported races by date.
.TP
.B sync\-videos
Auto-associate YouTube uploads with camera sessions.
.TP
.B list\-audio
List recorded audio sessions.
.TP
.B list\-devices
List available audio input devices.
.SS Administration
.TP
.B add\-user
Create a user directly in the database (admin bootstrap).
.TP
.B build\-polar
Rebuild polar performance baseline from historical session data.
.TP
.B scan\-transcript
Scan transcripts for trigger keywords and create auto-notes.
.SS Federation
.TP
.B identity init
Generate a boat keypair and identity. See
.B FEDERATION
below.
.TP
.B identity show
Display the current boat identity (public key, fingerprint, sail number).
.TP
.B co\-op create
Create a new co-op. The creating boat becomes admin.
.TP
.B co\-op status
Show co-op membership status and peer list.
.TP
.B co\-op invite
Invite another boat to a co-op using their boat card file.
.SH FEDERATION
Federation lets boats share race data directly with each other over Tailscale
\(em no central server. Each boat has a cryptographic identity (Ed25519
keypair), and co-ops are groups of boats that agree to share data.
.PP
Most federation tasks can also be done from the web admin interface at
\fB/admin/federation\fR.
.SS Creating an identity
.PP
.nf
helmlog identity init \\
    \-\-sail\-number 69 \\
    \-\-boat\-name "Javelina" \\
    \-\-email skipper@example.com
.fi
.PP
This creates an Ed25519 keypair under \fB~/.helmlog/identity/\fR.
The private key (\fBboat.key\fR) never leaves the Pi. The public identity
document (\fBboat.json\fR) is safe to share with fleet mates.
.TP
.B \-\-sail\-number NUM
Sail number (required).
.TP
.B \-\-boat\-name NAME
Boat name (required).
.TP
.B \-\-email EMAIL
Owner email address. Optional for standalone use, required for co-op
membership.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Overwrite an existing identity. Warning: this changes your boat's
cryptographic identity and invalidates existing co-op memberships.
.SS Creating a co-op
.PP
.nf
helmlog co\-op create \\
    \-\-name "Puget Sound J/105" \\
    \-\-area "Elliott Bay" \\
    \-\-area "Shilshole"
.fi
.TP
.B \-\-name NAME
Co-op name (required).
.TP
.B \-\-area AREA
Geographic area (repeatable).
.SS Inviting a boat
.PP
.nf
helmlog co\-op invite ./blackhawk\-boat.json
helmlog co\-op invite ./blackhawk\-boat.json \-\-co\-op\-id a1b2c3d4
.fi
.TP
.B BOAT_CARD.json
Path to the invitee's boat card file (required).
.TP
.B \-\-co\-op\-id ID
Target co-op ID. Required only when you admin multiple co-ops.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.helmlog/identity/boat.key
Ed25519 private key (mode 0600).
.TP
.B ~/.helmlog/identity/boat.pub
Public key (freely shareable).
.TP
.B ~/.helmlog/identity/boat.json
Boat card \(em the public identity document shared with fleet mates.
.TP
.B ~/.helmlog/co\-ops/<id>/charter.json
Signed co-op charter.
.TP
.B ~/.helmlog/co\-ops/<id>/members/*.json
Signed membership records for each co-op peer.
.TP
.B .env
Environment configuration. See \fB.env.example\fR for available settings.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DB_PATH
Path to the SQLite database file.
.TP
.B DATA_SOURCE
Data source: \fBsignalk\fR (default) or \fBcan\fR.
.TP
.B LOG_LEVEL
Logging level (DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR).
.TP
.B SK_HOST
Signal K server hostname (default: localhost).
.TP
.B SK_PORT
Signal K server port (default: 3000).
.SH WEB INTERFACE
The web interface is served at \fBhttp://<hostname>/\fR when running
\fBhelmlog run\fR. Admin pages are available under \fB/admin/\fR and require
authentication.
.PP
Key admin pages:
.TP
.B /admin/federation
Manage boat identity, create co-ops, and invite boats.
.TP
.B /admin/deployment
View version info, deploy updates, and configure auto-deploy.
.TP
.B /admin/settings
Configure system settings.
.SH SEE ALSO
Project documentation in the \fBdocs/\fR directory, especially:
.PP
.B docs/guide\-federation.md
\(em Federation setup guide
.br
.B docs/operators\-guide.md
\(em System operator guide
.br
.B docs/data\-licensing.md
\(em Data ownership and privacy policy
.SH AUTHORS
HelmLog contributors.
